The clinical variable analysis of this project uses the Kruskal-Wallis test and aims to see if there is a significant correlation between the expression of adenosine receptors and certain clinical variables related to cancer progression (ex: tumor stage, patient vital status, etc...). There are three R codes I created to assist in this analysis.  A brief description of each code is listed below:

<u>filesToCase.R</u> - This code relates the data from each sample back to the patient/case that it came from so that we can compare the expression of a particular gene with clinical variables of each patient.  Each patient/case has its own Case UUID ( which looks something like “78fcc813-d0a8-44aa-b004-62810dca9d12”).  A JSON file containing details for each sample (including the case uuid) was downloaded from The Cancer Genome Atlas.  This code reads the specified JSON file, extracts the file name and case uuid for each sample, and outputs the information with one column containing all the file names and a second column containing the matching case uuids.

ClinicalVariableCompiler.R - This code is based on sample code that was provided by The Cancer Genome Atlas on how to download patient data [https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/TCGAbiolinks/inst/doc/clinical.html](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/TCGAbiolinks/inst/doc/clinical.html).  It has been edited to download certain files/information that includes patient data related to cancer progression, which we want to use in this analysis.  We first sourced this code in R, then we used the command **getclinical("TCGA-HNSC")** to download the patient data for Head and Neck Squamous Cancer (HNSC) (TCGA-HNSC can be changed to specify which cancer to download information for).  This generated a csv file with all the information we wanted.

ClinicalMerge.R - The csv file obtained from the last step does not have all the appropriate information condensed into a single row/column.  Rather, there are multiple rows for a particular patient with information for different variables and/or updated information, and there are multiple columns for a particular clinical variable with data for different patients in each column.  This code helps to clean up and condense the csv file.  It merges all columns with the same column names (ex: “project”, “project.x”, “project.y”, “project.x.1”, etc…) while giving priority to the most recent data.  It merges all rows with the same “bcr_patient_uuid”, again giving priority to the most recent data.  It split the stage_event_tnm_categories variable into pathologic_T, pathologic_N, and pathologic_M since each of these is separately dertermined for a patient's cancer.

